one early January morning in 1896
retired colonel Albert J fountain and
his eight-year-old son Henry climbed
aboard their horse-drawn wagon and a
part of the small community of MEMC in
New Mexico fountain was assisting the
prosecution of a suspected cattle
rustler and in an appointment at the
Lincoln County Courthouse in Lincoln New
Mexico on February 1st 1896 fountain and
his son departed Lincoln to return home
they never arrived later a search team
found their wagon their horses and two
pools of blood their bodies were never
found
and the dunes of White Sands New Mexico
where they disappeared have never given
up their secrets the fountain legacy
didn't disappear that fateful day
however it lives on and the property
that fountain left his family now home
to one of the oldest bars in the region
called El Patio apotheosis on the same
brick paved streets that fountain
himself walked over 110 years ago and
his house in the building he used as his
own office the bar sits in the heart of
Mesilla Plaza at Calais davidyan in
Mesilla New Mexico just north of the
Texas border located directly across the
street from the spot where the Gatson
purchase was signed into law the
entrance kind of lets you know what to
expect and created by old hunting
trophies 150 year old adobe walls and
surroundings that are rich in history we
sat down with Al fountain the owner of
El Patio & AJ fountains great-grandson
over a beer at the bar he gave us a
history of this place and the origins of
his family in Mesilla New Mexico
grandfather the famous fountain in the
family had joined the Union Army at the
outset of the Civil War insanity was in
San Francisco at the time and joined out
of there and he joined the a unit called
with California after serving in the
Civil War
AJ fountain ended up here in Mesilla
where he ran a law office and a
newspaper out of the building that we
were sitting in just steps from the old
Dona Ana County Courthouse
AJ fountain defended a number of men
involved in the cattle Wars at the time
Billy the Kid was tried here for
shooting for killing a sheriff
he defended he was his defense lawyer
and if he lost his case but I my
granddad who was 10 years old when his
granddad disappeared in fact he was
supposed to go on the trip with him to
keep his son company but it didn't turn
out that way but he said that believe
the kid for you know people have revered
him his you know he's an iconic legend
in the southwest was no good he said he
was he was no good
the building itself dates back to the
1850s when Mesilla was founded and was
used for a number of purposes throughout
the years in fact at least part of it
has served as a drinking establishment
for well over 100 years sloughs here
that go back one judge Roy beans brother
ran a saloon here and I've got a
photograph of the the other saloon that
was it was called the Oliver Oliver
judge Roy Bean the famous hanging judge
and his brother had numerous saloons
throughout the West including one
briefly here at El Patio the fountain
family kept the building for years until
Al's father decided to open El Patio in
1934 he was an engineering student that
New Mexico hated in the sky this one of
his professors my dad's name was art
said art you know if I were you I would
try to get I would try to get into some
other kind of business because they're
not gonna hire you because you're
Hispanic that's what that was my that's
a story I heard the bar doesn't look
like it's changed much in the 77 years
since it's been open much of the hundred
and six year old adobe is visible and
the wall murals recall the West as it
was seen from Hollywood in the 1940s
through the years El Patio has been a
spot to see celebrities as they pass
through town hosting them since
practically the moment it opened back in
the 30s al gave us a rundown
aimes Earl Jones James Olmos of a rollin
Jayne Mansfield's daughter the Blues
Brothers we're in here one that we had a
band called the mother Fox Belushi and
Dan Aykroyd were here for concert at New
Mexico State and they came in here after
the concert they were looking for drugs
and they John John Belushi got up on the
stage and sang a song with it with a
band huh then he came out here there
wasn't anybody sitting at the bar but he
gave me a $50 goes get everybody
agreeing Clint Eastwood one of his first
movies he was he was doing hang him high
it was shot up north of here near Brady
raining Springs and he came in here one
set of the afternoon nobody in the bar
he came in and ordered the can of Coors
beer and he was saying that he was
bitching because he couldn't remember
his lines El Patio has been featuring
live music and dancing since its opening
mainly because of his father he had
dances and later on he had a little
Dixieland jazz group he played saxophone
yeah yeah he's play every Wednesday
night today they still bring in the
eclectic mix of music from Tex Mex to
rock the walls are covered with pictures
of past acts it had over the years
between the live music in history El
Patio earned itself a spot on the list
of the top 50 bars in the u.s. by Men's
Journal an award that al disputes
lightly because of the label given to
them biker bar one time it was a biker
bar the bikers you started coming in
here and it was it got so bad that that
dad and I were thinking about selling
the damn place and then one day I had
this idea about I a band
people that didn't have they had to have
a shirt with a collar to come in here
okay and that that's bitter that took
care of it do you believe that the
crowded El Patio might include bikers
but it might include college professors
artists writers local farmers and farm
workers basically people from all walks
of life biker bar or not El Patio is a
place you should put on your list of
bars to visit between its history and
the stories you won't be disappointed